BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA (BNS) 2023
=====================================
(Act No. 45 of 2023, replaces Indian Penal Code 1860)

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

Section 1 - Short Title, Commencement and Application
This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. It shall come into force on 1st July 2024. Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.

Section 2 - Definitions
In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) "Act" includes a series of acts and an illegal omission.
(2) "Animal" denotes any living creature other than a human being.
(3) "Child" means any person below the age of eighteen years.
(4) "Counterfeit" - A person is said to counterfeit who causes one thing to resemble another thing.
(5) "Court" includes all Judges and Magistrates.
(6) "Death" means the death of a human being.
(7) "Document" denotes any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures, or marks.
(8) "Gender" - The pronoun "he" and its derivatives are used of any person, whether male, female, or transgender.
(9) "Good faith" - Nothing is said to be done or believed in good faith which is done or believed without due care and attention.
(10) "Government" denotes the Central Government or a State Government.

Section 4 - General Explanations
Throughout this Sanhita, every definition of an offence, every penal provision, and every illustration shall be understood subject to the exceptions contained in the chapter entitled "General Exceptions."

CHAPTER II - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS

Section 14 - Act Done by a Person Bound by Law
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is bound by law to do it.

Section 15 - Act of Judge when Acting Judicially
Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to him by law.

Section 17 - Act Done by Person Justified by Law
Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law in doing it.

Section 18 - Accident in Doing a Lawful Act
Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution.

Section 19 - Act of a Child Under Seven Years of Age
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.

Section 20 - Act of a Child Above Seven and Under Twelve of Immature Understanding
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.

Section 21 - Act of a Person of Unsound Mind
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.

Section 24 - Consent Known to be Given Under Fear or Misconception
A consent is not such a consent as it intended by any section of this Sanhita if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of fact.

Section 25 - Act Done in Good Faith for Benefit of Child or Person of Unsound Mind
Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or of unsound mind, by or by consent of the guardian or other person having lawful charge of that person, is an offence.

Section 34 - Acts Done by Several Persons in Furtherance of Common Intention
When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.

Section 35 - When Such an Act is Criminal by Reason of its Being Done with a Criminal Knowledge or Intention
Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a criminal knowledge or intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins in the act with such knowledge or intention is liable for the act in the same manner as if the act were done by him alone with that knowledge or intention.

CHAPTER III - OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILD

Section 63 - Rape
A man is said to commit rape if he penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into the vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person, under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions.
Punishment: Rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 64 - Punishment for Rape
(1) Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever commits rape on a woman under sixteen years of age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life (which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life), and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: RI not less than 10 years extending to life imprisonment and fine.

Section 65 - Punishment for Rape in Certain Cases
(1) Whoever being a police officer, commits rape in the area of jurisdiction or in police custody; or being a public servant, commits rape; or being a member of the armed forces deployed in an area, commits rape; or being on the management or staff of a jail/remand home/women's institution, commits rape; or being on management of a hospital, commits rape; or being a relative/guardian/teacher of the woman, commits rape; or commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or commits rape on a pregnant woman; or commits rape on a woman incapable of giving consent; or being in a position of control or dominance, commits rape; or commits rape on a woman suffering from mental or physical disability; or commits rape causing grievous bodily harm or maiming or disfiguring or endangering life; or commits rape repeatedly on the same woman — shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life (which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life), and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: RI not less than 10 years to life imprisonment (natural life) and fine.

Section 66 - Punishment for Causing Death or Resulting in Persistent Vegetative State
Whoever commits an offence punishable under section 64(1) or section 65 and in the course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the death of the woman or causes the woman to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life (which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life), or with death.
Punishment: RI not less than 20 years to life imprisonment or death.

Section 67 - Sexual Intercourse by Husband upon His Wife During Separation
Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately, whether under a decree of separation or otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment 2 to 7 years and fine.

Section 68 - Sexual Intercourse by a Person in Authority
Whoever being in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship or being a public servant abuses his position to induce or seduce any woman either in his custody or under his charge to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: RI 5 to 10 years and fine.

Section 69 - Sexual Intercourse by Employing Deceitful Means
Whoever, by deceitful means or making promise to marry does sexual intercourse with a woman, without fulfilling such promise shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

Section 70 - Gang Rape
Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life (which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life), and with fine.
Punishment: RI not less than 20 years to life imprisonment (natural life) and fine.

Section 71 - Punishment for Repeat Offenders
Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence punishable under section 64 or section 65 or section 66 or section 70 and is subsequently convicted of an offence punishable under any of the said sections shall be punished with imprisonment for life (which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life), or with death.
Punishment: Life imprisonment (natural life) or death.

Section 74 - Assault or Criminal Force to Woman with Intent to Outrage Her Modesty
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment 1 to 5 years and fine.

Section 75 - Sexual Harassment
A man committing any of the following acts: physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; a demand or request for sexual favours; showing pornography against the will of a woman; making sexually coloured remarks — shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Punishment: RI up to 3 years or fine or both.

Section 76 - Assault or Use of Criminal Force to Woman with Intent to Disrobe
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such act with the intention of disrobing or compelling her to be naked shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment 3 to 7 years and fine.

Section 77 - Voyeurism
Any man who watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private act in circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed either by the perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of the perpetrator shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: First conviction: Imprisonment 1 to 3 years and fine. Second conviction: 3 to 7 years and fine.

Section 78 - Stalking
Any man who follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster personal interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such woman; or monitors the use by a woman of the internet, email or any other form of electronic communication commits the offence of stalking.
Punishment: First conviction: up to 3 years and fine. Second conviction: up to 5 years and fine.

Section 79 - Word, Gesture or Act Intended to Insult Modesty of Woman
Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine.
Punishment: SI up to 3 years and fine.

Section 80 - Dowry Death
Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.
Punishment: Imprisonment not less than 7 years but which may extend to imprisonment for life.

Section 81 - Cruelty by Husband or His Relatives
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 3 years and fine.

Section 85 - Kidnapping or Abducting Woman to Compel Her Marriage
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman with intent that she may be compelled, or knowing it to be likely that she will be compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

Section 87 - Kidnapping, Abducting or Inducing Woman to Compel for Marriage
Whoever by any means whatsoever, induces any minor girl under the age of eighteen years to go from any place or to do any act with intent that such girl may be, or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

CHAPTER IV - OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY

Section 100 - Culpable Homicide
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.
Elements: (1) Causing death (2) By an act (3) With intention to cause death OR intention to cause bodily injury likely to cause death OR knowledge of likelihood of causing death.

Section 101 - Murder
Culpable homicide is murder if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death; or if it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused; or if it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death; or if the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury.
Punishment: Death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 102 - Culpable Homicide Not Amounting to Murder - Punishment
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
Punishment: Life imprisonment or imprisonment 5 to 10 years and fine.

Section 103 - Punishment for Murder
(1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits murder on the ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground, each member of such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Death or life imprisonment and fine.

Section 104 - Punishment for Murder by Life Convict
Whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for life, commits murder, shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder of that person's natural life.
Punishment: Death or life imprisonment (natural life).

Section 105 - Causing Death by Negligence
Whoever causes death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 5 years and fine.

Section 106 - Causing Death by Negligence of Registered Medical Practitioner
Where the death is caused by a registered medical practitioner while performing medical procedure, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 2 years and fine.

Section 107 - Abetment of Suicide
If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

Section 108 - Abetment of Suicide of Child or Person of Unsound Mind
Whoever abets the commission of suicide by any child or person of unsound mind, shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Death or life imprisonment or imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

Section 109 - Attempt to Murder
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or to imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 10 years and fine. If hurt caused: life imprisonment or 10 years and fine.

Section 110 - Attempt to Commit Culpable Homicide
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 3 years or fine or both.

Section 115 - Voluntarily Causing Hurt
Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does thereby cause hurt to any person, is said to voluntarily cause hurt.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 117 - Voluntarily Causing Grievous Hurt
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he intends to cause or knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is grievous hurt, is said to voluntarily cause grievous hurt.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 118 - Voluntarily Causing Hurt by Dangerous Weapons or Means
Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 122, voluntarily causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 3 years or fine or both.

Section 121 - Voluntarily Causing Grievous Hurt by Dangerous Weapons or Means
Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 122, voluntarily causes grievous hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Life imprisonment or imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

Section 122 - Voluntarily Causing Hurt or Grievous Hurt to Deter Public Servant from Duty
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt or grievous hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person from discharging his duty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years (for hurt) or ten years (for grievous hurt), or with fine, or with both.
Punishment: Hurt: up to 5 years. Grievous hurt: up to 10 years. And fine.

Section 123 - Causing Hurt by Means of Poison with Intent to Commit an Offence
Whoever administers to or causes to be taken by any person any poison or any stupefying, intoxicating or unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause hurt to such person, or with intent to commit or to facilitate the commission of an offence or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

CHAPTER V - OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

Section 303 - Theft
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 304 - Snatching
Whoever commits theft by snatching any property from any person shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years.
Punishment: RI up to 3 years.

Section 305 - Theft in a Dwelling House or Means of Transportation
Whoever commits theft in any building, tent or vessel, which building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or used for the custody of property, or commits theft in a motor vehicle or railway, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 7 years and fine.

Section 307 - Extortion
Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property or valuable security, or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security, commits extortion.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 308 - Putting Person in Fear of Death or Grievous Hurt in Order to Commit Extortion
Whoever, in order to commit extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 7 years and fine.

Section 309 - Robbery
Theft is robbery if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. Extortion is robbery if the offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in the presence of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
Punishment: Rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 310 - Attempt to Commit Robbery
Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: RI up to 7 years and fine.

Section 311 - Dacoity
When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit dacoity.
Punishment: Rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 312 - Robbery or Dacoity with Attempt to Cause Death or Grievous Hurt
If at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the imprisonment may extend to imprisonment for life.
Punishment: RI extending to imprisonment for life, and fine.

Section 316 - Criminal Breach of Trust
Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or willfully suffers any other person so to do, commits criminal breach of trust.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 317 - Criminal Breach of Trust by Carrier, Warehouse Keeper, etc.
Whoever being a carrier, wharfinger or warehouse-keeper, or a clerk or servant, or being a banker, merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent, commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Life imprisonment or imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

Section 318 - Cheating
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 319 - Cheating by Personation
Whoever cheats by pretending to be some other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for another, or representing that he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really is, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 5 years or fine or both.

Section 320 - Cheating and Dishonestly Inducing Delivery of Property
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 7 years and fine.

Section 326 - Forgery
Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits forgery.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 329 - Criminal Trespass
Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property, or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an offence, is said to commit criminal trespass.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 330 - House Trespass
Whoever commits criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a place for the custody of property, is said to commit house-trespass.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 331 - House Trespass to Commit Offence Punishable with Imprisonment for Life
Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment for life shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

CHAPTER VI - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND PROPERTY MARKS

Section 335 - Mischief
Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, commits mischief.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

Section 336 - Mischief Causing Damage to Amount of Twenty-Five Thousand Rupees or Upwards
Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of twenty-five thousand rupees or upwards shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 5 years or fine or both.

CHAPTER VII - CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE

Section 351 - Criminal Intimidation
Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits criminal intimidation.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 352 - Intentional Insult with Intent to Provoke Breach of Peace
Whoever intentionally insults, and thereby gives provocation to any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 2 years or fine or both.

CHAPTER VIII - OF OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC TRANQUILITY

Section 189 - Unlawful Assembly
An assembly of five or more persons is designated an unlawful assembly if the common object of the persons composing that assembly is: to overawe by criminal force the Central or State Government or Parliament or Legislature or any public servant; to resist the execution of any law or legal process; to commit any mischief or criminal trespass; to obtain possession of any property by force; or to enforce any right or supposed right by criminal force.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

Section 190 - Every Member of Unlawful Assembly Guilty of Offence Committed in Prosecution of Common Object
If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at the time of the committing of that offence, is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence.

Section 191 - Rioting
Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any member thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member of such assembly is guilty of the offence of rioting.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 192 - Rioting Armed with Deadly Weapon
Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with a deadly weapon or with anything which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 5 years or fine or both.

CHAPTER IX - OFFENCES RELATING TO TERRORISM AND ORGANISED CRIME

Section 111 - Organised Crime
Any continuing unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery, vehicle theft, extortion, land grabbing, contract killing, economic offence, cyber-crimes having severe consequences, trafficking of persons, drugs, weapons or illicit goods or services, and human trafficking for prostitution or ransom by any person or a group of persons acting in concert, singly or jointly, either as a member of an organised crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate, by use of violence, threat of violence, intimidation, coercion, or by any other unlawful means to obtain direct or indirect material benefit including a financial benefit.
Punishment: If offence results in death: death or life imprisonment and fine not less than ten lakh rupees. Otherwise: imprisonment not less than five years extending to life imprisonment and fine not less than five lakh rupees.

Section 112 - Petty Organised Crime
Any continuing unlawful activity including theft, snatching, cheating, unauthorized selling of tickets, unauthorized betting or gambling, selling of public examination question papers or any other similar criminal activity but not being an organized crime — when committed by a group or gang shall be punished with imprisonment not less than one year extending to seven years.
Punishment: Imprisonment 1 to 7 years and fine.

Section 113 - Terrorist Act
Whoever does any act with intent to threaten or likely to threaten the unity, integrity, sovereignty, security, or economic security of India or with intent to strike terror or likely to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any foreign country — by using bombs, dynamite, explosive substances, inflammable substances, firearms, biological/chemical/nuclear agents, or any other substance to cause or likely to cause death, injuries, damage to property, disruption of essential supplies or services — commits a terrorist act.
Punishment: If results in death: death or life imprisonment. Otherwise: imprisonment not less than five years extending to life imprisonment and fine.

CHAPTER X - OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS

Section 197 - Public Servant Taking Gratification Other Than Legal Remuneration
Whoever, being or expecting to be a public servant, accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain from any person, for himself or for any other person, any gratification whatever, other than legal remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act commits an offence.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

CHAPTER XI - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE

Section 82 - Marrying Again During Lifetime of Husband or Wife
Whoever, having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such husband or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 7 years and fine.

CHAPTER XII - KIDNAPPING AND ABDUCTION

Section 137 - Kidnapping
Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from India, and kidnapping from lawful guardianship. Whoever takes or entices any minor under sixteen years of age if a male, or under eighteen years of age if a female, or any person of unsound mind, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor or person without the consent of such guardian, is said to kidnap.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 138 - Kidnapping or Abducting in Order to Murder
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Life imprisonment or RI up to 10 years and fine.

Section 140 - Kidnapping or Abducting with Intent to Secretly and Wrongfully Confine Person
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be secretly and wrongfully confined, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 7 years and fine.

Section 141 - Kidnapping or Abducting in Order to Subject Person to Grievous Hurt or Slavery
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be subjected, or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being subjected to grievous hurt, or slavery, or to the unnatural lust of any person, or knowing it to be likely that such person will be so subjected or disposed of, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

Section 143 - Wrongful Confinement
Whoever wrongfully restrains any person in such a manner as to prevent that person from proceedings beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said to wrongfully confine that person.
Punishment: Imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.

CHAPTER XIII - CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ABETMENT

Section 61 - Criminal Conspiracy
When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done an illegal act, or an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy. Where any one of the parties to the conspiracy does any act to further the agreement, the offence is complete.
Punishment: Where conspiracy is to commit a serious offence (punishable with death, life imprisonment, or RI of 2+ years): same as abetment. Otherwise: imprisonment up to six months, or fine, or both.

Section 45 - Abetment of a Thing
A person abets the doing of a thing, who: instigates any person to do that thing; or engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing; or intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.

Section 46 - Abettor
Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Sanhita for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence.

CHAPTER XIV - OFFENCES RELATING TO CURRENCY AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS

Section 178 - Counterfeiting Currency Notes or Bank Notes
Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of counterfeiting, any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment: Life imprisonment or imprisonment up to 10 years and fine.

CHAPTER XV - DEFAMATION

Section 356 - Defamation
Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said to defame that person.
Punishment: Simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
